# Fruitful functions

Many of the Python functions we have used, such as the math functions,
produce return values. But the functions we’ve written are all void:
they have an effect, like printing a value or moving a turtle, but they
don’t have a return value. In this chapter you will learn to write
fruitful functions.

## Return values

Calling the function generates a return value, which we usually assign
to a variable or use as part of an expression.

    e = math.exp(1.0)
    height = radius * math.sin(radians)

The functions we have written so far are void. Speaking casually, they
have no return value; more precisely, their return value is
<span>`None`</span>.

In this chapter, we are (finally) going to write fruitful functions. The
first example is <span>`area`</span>, which returns the area of a circle
with the given radius:

    def area(radius):
        a = math.pi * radius**2
        return a

We have seen the <span>`return`</span> statement before, but in a
fruitful function the <span>`return`</span> statement includes an
expression. This statement means: “Return immediately from this function
and use the following expression as a return value.” The expression can
be arbitrarily complicated, so we could have written this function more
concisely:

    def area(radius):
        return math.pi * radius**2

On the other hand, <span>**temporary variables**</span> like
<span>`a`</span> can make debugging easier.

Sometimes it is useful to have multiple return statements, one in each
branch of a conditional:

    def absolute_value(x):
        if x < 0:
            return -x
        else:
            return x

Since these <span>`return`</span> statements are in an alternative
conditional, only one runs.

As soon as a return statement runs, the function terminates without
executing any subsequent statements. Code that appears after a
<span>`return`</span> statement, or any other place the flow of
execution can never reach, is called <span>**dead code**</span>.

In a fruitful function, it is a good idea to ensure that every possible
path through the program hits a <span>`return`</span> statement. For
example:

    def absolute_value(x):
        if x < 0:
            return -x
        if x > 0:
            return x

This function is incorrect because if <span>`x`</span> happens to be 0,
neither condition is true, and the function ends without hitting a
<span>`return`</span> statement. If the flow of execution gets to the
end of a function, the return value is <span>`None`</span>, which is not
the absolute value of 0.

    >>> print(absolute_value(0))
    None

By the way, Python provides a built-in function called
<span>`abs`</span> that computes absolute values.

As an exercise, write a <span>`compare`</span> function that takes two
values, <span>`x`</span> and <span>`y`</span>, and returns
<span>`1`</span> if <span>`x > y`</span>, <span>`0`</span> if <span>`x
== y`</span>, and <span>`-1`</span> if <span>`x < y`</span>.

## Incremental development

As you write larger functions, you might find yourself spending more
time debugging.

To deal with increasingly complex programs, you might want to try a
process called <span>**incremental development**</span>. The goal of
incremental development is to avoid long debugging sessions by adding
and testing only a small amount of code at a time.

As an example, suppose you want to find the distance between two points,
given by the coordinates \((x_1, y_1)\) and \((x_2, y_2)\). By the
Pythagorean theorem, the distance is:

\[\mathrm{distance} = \sqrt{(x_2 - x_1)^2 + (y_2 - y_1)^2}\] The first
step is to consider what a <span>`distance`</span> function should look
like in Python. In other words, what are the inputs (parameters) and
what is the output (return value)?

In this case, the inputs are two points, which you can represent using
four numbers. The return value is the distance represented by a
floating-point value.

Immediately you can write an outline of the function:

    def distance(x1, y1, x2, y2):
        return 0.0

Obviously, this version doesn’t compute distances; it always returns
zero. But it is syntactically correct, and it runs, which means that you
can test it before you make it more complicated.

To test the new function, call it with sample arguments:

    >>> distance(1, 2, 4, 6)
    0.0

I chose these values so that the horizontal distance is 3 and the
vertical distance is 4; that way, the result is 5, the hypotenuse of a
3-4-5 right triangle. When testing a function, it is useful to know the
right answer.

At this point we have confirmed that the function is syntactically
correct, and we can start adding code to the body. A reasonable next
step is to find the differences \(x_2 - x_1\) and \(y_2 - y_1\). The
next version stores those values in temporary variables and prints them.

    def distance(x1, y1, x2, y2):
        dx = x2 - x1
        dy = y2 - y1
        print('dx is', dx)
        print('dy is', dy)
        return 0.0

If the function is working, it should display `dx is 3` and `dy is 4`.
If so, we know that the function is getting the right arguments and
performing the first computation correctly. If not, there are only a few
lines to check.

Next we compute the sum of squares of <span>`dx`</span> and
<span>`dy`</span>:

    def distance(x1, y1, x2, y2):
        dx = x2 - x1
        dy = y2 - y1
        dsquared = dx**2 + dy**2
        print('dsquared is: ', dsquared)
        return 0.0

Again, you would run the program at this stage and check the output
(which should be 25). Finally, you can use <span>`math.sqrt`</span> to
compute and return the result:

    def distance(x1, y1, x2, y2):
        dx = x2 - x1
        dy = y2 - y1
        dsquared = dx**2 + dy**2
        result = math.sqrt(dsquared)
        return result

If that works correctly, you are done. Otherwise, you might want to
print the value of <span>`result`</span> before the return statement.

The final version of the function doesn’t display anything when it runs;
it only returns a value. The <span>`print`</span> statements we wrote
are useful for debugging, but once you get the function working, you
should remove them. Code like that is called
<span>**scaffolding**</span> because it is helpful for building the
program but is not part of the final product.

When you start out, you should add only a line or two of code at a time.
As you gain more experience, you might find yourself writing and
debugging bigger chunks. Either way, incremental development can save
you a lot of debugging time.

The key aspects of the process are:

1.  Start with a working program and make small incremental changes. At
    any point, if there is an error, you should have a good idea where
    it is.

2.  Use variables to hold intermediate values so you can display and
    check them.

3.  Once the program is working, you might want to remove some of the
    scaffolding or consolidate multiple statements into compound
    expressions, but only if it does not make the program difficult to
    read.

As an exercise, use incremental development to write a function called
<span>`hypotenuse`</span> that returns the length of the hypotenuse of a
right triangle given the lengths of the other two legs as arguments.
Record each stage of the development process as you go.

## Composition

As you should expect by now, you can call one function from within
another. As an example, we’ll write a function that takes two points,
the center of the circle and a point on the perimeter, and computes the
area of the circle.

Assume that the center point is stored in the variables
<span>`xc`</span> and <span>`yc`</span>, and the perimeter point is in
<span>`xp`</span> and <span>`yp`</span>. The first step is to find the
radius of the circle, which is the distance between the two points. We
just wrote a function, <span>`  distance `</span>, that does that:

    radius = distance(xc, yc, xp, yp)

The next step is to find the area of a circle with that radius; we just
wrote that, too:

    result = area(radius)

Encapsulating these steps in a function, we get:

    def circle_area(xc, yc, xp, yp):
        radius = distance(xc, yc, xp, yp)
        result = area(radius)
        return result

The temporary variables <span>`radius`</span> and <span>`result`</span>
are useful for development and debugging, but once the program is
working, we can make it more concise by composing the function calls:

    def circle_area(xc, yc, xp, yp):
        return area(distance(xc, yc, xp, yp))

## Boolean functions

Functions can return booleans, which is often convenient for hiding
complicated tests inside functions. For example:

    def is_divisible(x, y):
        if x % y == 0:
            return True
        else:
            return False

It is common to give boolean functions names that sound like yes/no
questions; `is_divisible` returns either <span>`True`</span> or
<span>`False`</span> to indicate whether <span>`x`</span> is divisible
by <span>`y`</span>.

Here is an example:

    >>> is_divisible(6, 4)
    False
    >>> is_divisible(6, 3)
    True

The result of the <span>`==`</span> operator is a boolean, so we can
write the function more concisely by returning it directly:

    def is_divisible(x, y):
        return x % y == 0

Boolean functions are often used in conditional statements:

    if is_divisible(x, y):
        print('x is divisible by y')

It might be tempting to write something like:

    if is_divisible(x, y) == True:
        print('x is divisible by y')

But the extra comparison is unnecessary.

As an exercise, write a function `is_between(x, y, z)` that returns
<span>`True`</span> if \(x \le y \le z\) or <span>`False`</span>
otherwise.

## More recursion

We have only covered a small subset of Python, but you might be
interested to know that this subset is a <span>*complete*</span>
programming language, which means that anything that can be computed can
be expressed in this language. Any program ever written could be
rewritten using only the language features you have learned so far
(actually, you would need a few commands to control devices like the
mouse, disks, etc., but that’s all).

Proving that claim is a nontrivial exercise first accomplished by Alan
Turing, one of the first computer scientists (some would argue that he
was a mathematician, but a lot of early computer scientists started as
mathematicians). Accordingly, it is known as the Turing Thesis. For a
more complete (and accurate) discussion of the Turing Thesis, I
recommend Michael Sipser’s book <span>*Introduction to the Theory of
Computation*</span>.

To give you an idea of what you can do with the tools you have learned
so far, we’ll evaluate a few recursively defined mathematical functions.
A recursive definition is similar to a circular definition, in the sense
that the definition contains a reference to the thing being defined. A
truly circular definition is not very useful:

  - vorpal:  
    An adjective used to describe something that is vorpal.

If you saw that definition in the dictionary, you might be annoyed. On
the other hand, if you looked up the definition of the factorial
function, denoted with the symbol \(!\), you might get something like
this: \[\begin{aligned}
&&  0! = 1 \\
&&  n! = n (n-1)!\end{aligned}\] This definition says that the factorial
of 0 is 1, and the factorial of any other value, \(n\), is \(n\)
multiplied by the factorial of \(n-1\).

So \(3!\) is 3 times \(2!\), which is 2 times \(1!\), which is 1 times
\(0!\). Putting it all together, \(3!\) equals 3 times 2 times 1 times
1, which is 6.

If you can write a recursive definition of something, you can write a
Python program to evaluate it. The first step is to decide what the
parameters should be. In this case it should be clear that
<span>`factorial`</span> takes an integer:

    def factorial(n):

If the argument happens to be 0, all we have to do is return 1:

    def factorial(n):
        if n == 0:
            return 1

Otherwise, and this is the interesting part, we have to make a recursive
call to find the factorial of \(n-1\) and then multiply it by \(n\):

    def factorial(n):
        if n == 0:
            return 1
        else:
            recurse = factorial(n-1)
            result = n * recurse
            return result

The flow of execution for this program is similar to the flow of
<span>`  countdown `</span> in Section [6.8](#recursion). If we call
<span>`factorial`</span> with the value 3:

Since 3 is not 0, we take the second branch and calculate the factorial
of <span>`n-1`</span>...

> Since 2 is not 0, we take the second branch and calculate the
> factorial of <span>`n-1`</span>...
> 
> > Since 1 is not 0, we take the second branch and calculate the
> > factorial of <span>`n-1`</span>...
> > 
> > > Since 0 equals 0, we take the first branch and return 1 without
> > > making any more recursive calls.
> > 
> > The return value, 1, is multiplied by \(n\), which is 1, and the
> > result is returned.
> 
> The return value, 1, is multiplied by \(n\), which is 2, and the
> result is returned.

The return value (2) is multiplied by \(n\), which is 3, and the result,
6, becomes the return value of the function call that started the whole
process.

Figure [7.1](#fig.stack3) shows what the stack diagram looks like for
this sequence of function calls.

![Stack diagram.](figs/stack3.pdf)

The return values are shown being passed back up the stack. In each
frame, the return value is the value of <span>`result`</span>, which is
the product of <span>`n`</span> and <span>`recurse`</span>.

In the last frame, the local variables <span>`recurse`</span> and
<span>`result`</span> do not exist, because the branch that creates them
does not run.

## Leap of faith

Following the flow of execution is one way to read programs, but it can
quickly become overwhelming. An alternative is what I call the “leap of
faith”. When you come to a function call, instead of following the flow
of execution, you <span> *assume*</span> that the function works
correctly and returns the right result.

In fact, you are already practicing this leap of faith when you use
built-in functions. When you call <span>`math.cos`</span> or
<span>`math.exp`</span>, you don’t examine the bodies of those
functions. You just assume that they work because the people who wrote
the built-in functions were good programmers.

The same is true when you call one of your own functions. For example,
in Section [7.4](#boolean), we wrote a function called `is_divisible`
that determines whether one number is divisible by another. Once we have
convinced ourselves that this function is correct—by examining the code
and testing—we can use the function without looking at the body again.

The same is true of recursive programs. When you get to the recursive
call, instead of following the flow of execution, you should assume that
the recursive call works (returns the correct result) and then ask
yourself, “Assuming that I can find the factorial of \(n-1\), can I
compute the factorial of \(n\)?” It is clear that you can, by
multiplying by \(n\).

Of course, it’s a bit strange to assume that the function works
correctly when you haven’t finished writing it, but that’s why it’s
called a leap of faith\!

## One more example

After <span>`factorial`</span>, the most common example of a recursively
defined mathematical function is <span>`fibonacci`</span>, which has the
following definition (see
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number>): \[\begin{aligned}
&& \mathrm{fibonacci}(0) = 0 \\
&& \mathrm{fibonacci}(1) = 1 \\
&& \mathrm{fibonacci}(n) = \mathrm{fibonacci}(n-1) + \mathrm{fibonacci}(n-2)\end{aligned}\]
Translated into Python, it looks like this:

    def fibonacci(n):
        if n == 0:
            return 0
        elif  n == 1:
            return 1
        else:
            return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)

If you try to follow the flow of execution here, even for fairly small
values of \(n\), your head explodes. But according to the leap of faith,
if you assume that the two recursive calls work correctly, then it is
clear that you get the right result by adding them together.

## Checking types

What happens if we call <span>`factorial`</span> and give it 1.5 as an
argument?

    >>> factorial(1.5)
    RuntimeError: Maximum recursion depth exceeded

It looks like an infinite recursion. How can that be? The function has a
base case—when <span>`n == 0`</span>. But if <span>`n`</span> is not an
integer, we can <span>*miss*</span> the base case and recurse forever.

In the first recursive call, the value of <span>`n`</span> is 0.5. In
the next, it is -0.5. From there, it gets smaller (more negative), but
it will never be 0.

We have two choices. We can try to generalize the
<span>`factorial`</span> function to work with floating-point numbers,
or we can make <span>`  factorial `</span> check the type of its
argument. The first option is called the gamma function and it’s a
little beyond the scope of this book. So we’ll go for the second.

We can use the built-in function <span>`isinstance`</span> to verify the
type of the argument. While we’re at it, we can also make sure the
argument is positive:

    def factorial(n):
        if not isinstance(n, int):
            print('Factorial is only defined for integers.')
            return None
        elif n < 0:
            print('Factorial is not defined for negative integers.')
            return None
        elif n == 0:
            return 1
        else:
            return n * factorial(n-1)

The first base case handles nonintegers; the second handles negative
integers. In both cases, the program prints an error message and returns
<span>`None`</span> to indicate that something went wrong:

    >>> print(factorial('fred'))
    Factorial is only defined for integers.
    None
    >>> print(factorial(-2))
    Factorial is not defined for negative integers.
    None

If we get past both checks, we know that \(n\) is a non-negative
integer, so we can prove that the recursion terminates.

This program demonstrates a pattern sometimes called a
<span>**guardian**</span>. The first two conditionals act as guardians,
protecting the code that follows from values that might cause an error.
The guardians make it possible to prove the correctness of the code.

In Section [12.4](#raise) we will see a more flexible alternative to
printing an error message: raising an exception.

## Debugging

Breaking a large program into smaller functions creates natural
checkpoints for debugging. If a function is not working, there are three
possibilities to consider:

  - There is something wrong with the arguments the function is getting;
    a precondition is violated.

  - There is something wrong with the function; a postcondition is
    violated.

  - There is something wrong with the return value or the way it is
    being used.

To rule out the first possibility, you can add a <span>`print`</span>
statement at the beginning of the function and display the values of the
parameters (and maybe their types). Or you can write code that checks
the preconditions explicitly.

If the parameters look good, add a <span>`print`</span> statement before
each <span>`return`</span> statement and display the return value. If
possible, check the result by hand. Consider calling the function with
values that make it easy to check the result (as in
Section [7.2](#incremental.development)).

If the function seems to be working, look at the function call to make
sure the return value is being used correctly (or used at all\!).

Adding print statements at the beginning and end of a function can help
make the flow of execution more visible. For example, here is a version
of <span>`factorial`</span> with print statements:

    def factorial(n):
        space = ' ' * (4 * n)
        print(space, 'factorial', n)
        if n == 0:
            print(space, 'returning 1')
            return 1
        else:
            recurse = factorial(n-1)
            result = n * recurse
            print(space, 'returning', result)
            return result

<span>`space`</span> is a string of space characters that controls the
indentation of the output. Here is the result of
<span>`factorial(4)`</span> :


                    factorial 4
                factorial 3
            factorial 2
        factorial 1
    factorial 0
    returning 1
        returning 1
            returning 2
                returning 6
                    returning 24


If you are confused about the flow of execution, this kind of output can
be helpful. It takes some time to develop effective scaffolding, but a
little bit of scaffolding can save a lot of debugging.

## Glossary

  - temporary variable:  
    A variable used to store an intermediate value in a complex
    calculation.

  - dead code:  
    Part of a program that can never run, often because it appears after
    a <span>`return`</span> statement.

  - incremental development:  
    A program development plan intended to avoid debugging by adding and
    testing only a small amount of code at a time.

  - scaffolding:  
    Code that is used during program development but is not part of the
    final version.

  - guardian:  
    A programming pattern that uses a conditional statement to check for
    and handle circumstances that might cause an error.

## Exercises

Draw a stack diagram for the following program. What does the program
print?

    def b(z):
        prod = a(z, z)
        print(z, prod)
        return prod
    
    def a(x, y):
        x = x + 1
        return x * y
    
    def c(x, y, z):
        total = x + y + z
        square = b(total)**2
        return square
    
    x = 1
    y = x + 1
    print(c(x, y+3, x+y))

<span id="ackermann" label="ackermann">\[ackermann\]</span>

The Ackermann function, \(A(m, n)\), is defined:

\[\begin{aligned}
A(m, n) = \begin{cases} 
              n+1 & \mbox{if } m = 0 \\ 
        A(m-1, 1) & \mbox{if } m > 0 \mbox{ and } n = 0 \\ 
A(m-1, A(m, n-1)) & \mbox{if } m > 0 \mbox{ and } n > 0.
\end{cases} \end{aligned}\] See
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ackermann_function>. Write a function
named <span>`ack`</span> that evaluates the Ackermann function. Use your
function to evaluate <span>`ack(3, 4)`</span>, which should be 125. What
happens for larger values of <span>`m`</span> and <span>`n`</span>?
Solution: <http://thinkpython2.com/code/ackermann.py>.

<span id="palindrome" label="palindrome">\[palindrome\]</span>

A palindrome is a word that is spelled the same backward and forward,
like “noon” and “redivider”. Recursively, a word is a palindrome if the
first and last letters are the same and the middle is a palindrome.

The following are functions that take a string argument and return the
first, last, and middle letters:

    def first(word):
        return word[0]
    
    def last(word):
        return word[-1]
    
    def middle(word):
        return word[1:-1]

We’ll see how they work in Chapter [9](#strings).

1.  Type these functions into a file named <span>`palindrome.py`</span>
    and test them out. What happens if you call <span>`middle`</span>
    with a string with two letters? One letter? What about the empty
    string, which is written `''` and contains no letters?

2.  Write a function called `is_palindrome` that takes a string argument
    and returns <span>`True`</span> if it is a palindrome and
    <span>`False`</span> otherwise. Remember that you can use the
    built-in function <span>`len`</span> to check the length of a
    string.

Solution: <http://thinkpython2.com/code/palindrome_soln.py>.

A number, \(a\), is a power of \(b\) if it is divisible by \(b\) and
\(a/b\) is a power of \(b\). Write a function called `is_power` that
takes parameters <span>`a`</span> and <span>`b`</span> and returns
<span>`True`</span> if <span>`a`</span> is a power of <span>`b`</span>.
Note: you will have to think about the base case.

The greatest common divisor (GCD) of \(a\) and \(b\) is the largest
number that divides both of them with no remainder.

One way to find the GCD of two numbers is based on the observation that
if \(r\) is the remainder when \(a\) is divided by \(b\), then \(gcd(a,
b) = gcd(b, r)\). As a base case, we can use \(gcd(a, 0) = a\).

Write a function called `gcd` that takes parameters <span>`a`</span> and
<span>`b`</span> and returns their greatest common divisor.

Credit: This exercise is based on an example from Abelson and Sussman’s
<span>*Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs*</span>.
